# RNP-016: Integration of Arnold in the Render Network

| RNP # | Title | Category | Authors | Created | Status |
| ----- | --------------------- | -------- | ------------------ | ---------- |------- |
| 016 | Integration of Arnold in the Render Network | Core | Dino Muhic | 2024-12-02 | Draft |

# 1. Overview

## 1.1 Proposal Summary

Arnold is an advanced Monte Carlo ray tracing renderer that is used for
feature-length animation and visual effects in film. This proposal is to
integrate the Arnold Render Engine with the Render Network. It will
provide creators using Arnold a powerful, scalable solution to render
their projects efficiently, leveraging the decentralized infrastructure
of the Render Network. The initiative will benefit Arnold\'s large user
base in production studios, as well as independent artists, by offering
fast and reliable rendering resources.

## 1.2 Background

Arnold is a widely-used production renderer with a focus on
high-quality, physically-based results, used across major industries,
from VFX studios to animation houses. Originally developed by Solid
Angle and now owned by Autodesk, Arnold is the default renderer for
tools like Maya and 3ds Max, and it\'s also supported in Houdini and
Cinema 4D.

By integrating Arnold into the Render Network, we would provide users
with seamless access to Arnold\'s rendering power while benefiting from
the decentralized nature of the network.

# 2. Motivation

## 2.1 Expanding Production Capabilities

Arnold has been the backbone for numerous high-profile projects due to
its ability to handle massive datasets and complex scenes. Integrating
Arnold into the Render Network would ensure that its power can be scaled
further, giving users, from independent artists to large studios, the
opportunity to render efficiently.

## 2.2 Robust integration using the Arnold SDK

Arnold can render .ass (Arnold Scene Source) and .usd (Universal Scene
Description) files directly using the Arnold SDK without the need for a
content creation app like Maya in the middle.\
\
Arnold's SDK provides comprehensive functionality for rendering .ass and
.usd files.

-   **Performance**: Rendering .ass and .usd files directly using the
    SDK is efficient and avoids the overhead of launching a DCC
    application, making it ideal for high-performance rendering
    pipelines.

-   **Multi-Renderer Pipelines**: With Arnold's Hydra support and USD,
    you can easily swap renderers in a USD-based pipeline, making Arnold
    one of the multiple render engines that can visualize the same scene
    data.

By leveraging the Arnold SDK, .ass and .usd files can be directly
loaded, modified, and rendered, allowing full control over the rendering
process without relying on Maya, Houdini, or other DCC applications.
This can significantly streamline the integration of Arnold into larger,
automated workflows such as the Render Network.

## 2.3 Decentralization and Democratization

Much like the Arnold integration, adding Arnold to the Render Network
continues the mission to decentralize access to powerful tools,
democratizing content creation by enabling more creators to access
top-tier rendering capabilities without the need for in-house resources.

## 2.4 Arnold Ecosystem

Arnold is a core tool in the production pipelines of many studios. This
integration will target its extensive user base, from Maya and Houdini
users to those in Cinema 4D and Katana pipelines, providing them with
the flexibility to render using Arnold in a decentralized network
setting.

By tapping into Arnold's user base, this initiative opens up new growth
opportunities for the Render Network by attracting high-end production
houses.

# 3. Stakeholders 

### Autodesk/Solid Angle

While Arnold is a commercial product, Autodesk\'s support for industry
standards like USD and MaterialX means that integration into other
ecosystems is possible. Collaboration with Autodesk may be pursued.

### Artist Community

A wide network of artists using Arnold will participate in beta testing
and provide feedback.

### Render Network Developer Team

Responsible for integrating Arnold's functionality into the network.

### Render Network Client Success Team

Responsible for supporting and educating Arnold users during the
integration phase.

### Render Network Foundation

Responsible for marketing and promoting the Arnold integration to the
target audience.

# 4. Implementation

## 4.1 Timeline

The implementation of the Arnold integration is planned for the year
2025.

## Market Research and Community Involvement

\- Conduct market research for third-party tools and libraries to be
integrated.

\- Implement a voting system for the artist community to suggest and
vote on which third-party tools should be integrated over time.

## Development and Release Process

The integration of Arnold into the Render Network will follow a
structured process to ensure a smooth rollout and high-quality user
experience. The key stages are:

1.  **Local Development and Testing:** The Render Network developer team
    will work on integrating Arnold using the Arnold SDK on their local
    development machines, conducting thorough testing and debugging to
    ensure compatibility and stability.

2.  **Developer Machines on Staging:** After the local development and
    testing phase, the integration will be deployed to the staging
    environment using the developers\' machines. This allows the team to
    test the integration in an environment that closely mimics the
    production setup, but with the familiarity of their own development
    machines.

3.  **Dedicated Staging Machines:** Once the integration has been
    thoroughly tested on the developers\' machines in the staging
    environment, it will be deployed to dedicated staging machines. This
    step ensures that the integration functions as expected on machines
    specifically configured for the staging environment, further
    validating its readiness for production.

4.  **Closed Beta Release:** After extensive internal testing, the
    Arnold integration will be rolled out to a select group of closed
    beta testers. These will be artists from the Arnold community who
    have experience with the render engine and are willing to provide
    valuable feedback on the integration. The closed beta phase will
    help identify and address any remaining issues before a wider public
    release.

5.  **Documentation Preparation:** During the closed beta phase, the
    Render Network\'s Client Success team will work closely with the
    beta testers to gather insights and create comprehensive
    documentation. This documentation will cover topics such as scene
    optimization, scene preparation, network usage, and troubleshooting,
    ensuring that users have the necessary resources to make the most of
    the Arnold integration.

6.  **Public Beta Release:** Based on the feedback and improvements from
    the closed beta phase, the Arnold integration will be made available
    as a public beta. This phase will allow a broader audience of Arnold
    users to test the integration and provide feedback, helping to
    identify any remaining issues or areas for improvement.

7.  **Monitoring and Refinement:** Throughout the public beta phase, the
    Render Network team will closely monitor error rates, support cases,
    and user feedback. This information will be used to refine the
    integration further, addressing any outstanding issues or
    implementing requested features.

8.  **Stable Release:** Once the public beta phase has been successful
    and all major issues have been addressed, the Arnold integration
    will be rolled out as a stable release. This final version will be
    made available to all Render Network users, providing them with
    access to the powerful rendering capabilities of the Render Network
    for their Arnold projects.

By following such a structured approach, the Render Network team aims to
ensure a seamless integration of Arnold and to leverage feedback and
insights from the Arnold community.

# 5. Technical Considerations

The team has gained valuable experience from the previous integration
with Maxon\'s Cinema 4D and Blender-Cycles, which will be leveraged for
the Arnold integration. Specifically:

1.  **Encryption Solution:** The existing encryption solution will be
    utilized to secure the rendering process for Arnold projects.

2.  **Limited Initial Scope:** The initial integration will focus on the
    Arnold SDK and rendering files delivered in the .ass and .usd
    formats.

3.  **User Interface:** The web application UI will be extended to
    provide Arnold-specific features and settings.

4.  **Outputs and Formats:** Differences in output formats, color
    spaces, and AOVs (Arbitrary Output Variables) between Arnold and
    existing render engines will be addressed.

5.  **Version Handling:** The existing multi-render version handling
    mechanisms will be used to provide multiple versions of Arnold for
    artists to choose from.

6.  **Licensing:** Since Arnold is a commercial product, licensing
    integration will be required, ensuring that render nodes comply with
    Autodesk\'s licensing system.

7.  **API Extensions:** The existing Render Network web API will be
    extended to support Arnold-specific functionality, enabling seamless
    integration with various desktop tools and with production
    pipelines, such as those used for virtual production.

8.  **GPU and CPU Support**: Arnold is CPU-based, with additional GPU
    rendering support. The Render Network will need to account for
    efficient scaling of both CPU and GPU nodes to ensure optimal
    performance.

## 5.1 Artist Workflow

The artist workflow for Arnold will be similar to the existing workflows
for other engines, but with some Arnold-specific adjustments:

1.  **Mandatory scene preparation steps:** Before submitting a scene for
    rendering, any third-party plugins used in the project will need to
    be baked into explicit scene data and assets.

2.  **Scene Data and Asset Packaging:** Scenes will be saved as .ass and
    .usd files, including all scene data and assets, for rendering on
    the Render Network.

3.  **File Upload:** Arnold users will be able to upload their scene
    files (.ass, .usd) along with necessary assets for rendering.

4.  **Render Tiers and Pricing:** For GPU rendering, the same render
    tiers and pricing model as existing integrations will be used.

## 5.2 Render Nodes

To accommodate Arnold:

1.  **Scaling:** The job assigner will be optimized to ensure efficient
    GPU & CPU scaling for Arnold rendering jobs, maximizing resource
    utilization.

2.  **Node Utilization:** Arnold jobs therefore may improve the
    utilization of smaller nodes on the network, potentially increasing
    overall network efficiency.

3.  **New Hardware Requirements:** Render nodes will need to be
    configured for both CPU and GPU Arnold jobs. This may necessitate
    adding CPU-heavy node configurations to the network.

## 

## 5.3 Outlook

**Render Network Wizard for Arnold:** Consistent with the approach taken
for the integration of C4D (RNP-012: Render Network Wizard for Maxon
Cinema 4D), a dedicated wizard application will be proposed for DCCs
using Arnold. This wizard will seamlessly integrate with the Arnold
render engine, guiding artists through the mandatory scene preparation
steps and helping reduce user errors.

By addressing these technical considerations, the Render Network team
aims to ensure a seamless integration of Arnold in the existing network
architecture and infrastructure.

# 6. Drawbacks

-   An increased number of DCC and render engine versions to maintain

-   Need for more diverse support teams supporting more render engines
    and more DCCs

-   Potential challenges in GPU scaling with Arnold vs Octane

-   Increased resource demand for Arnold's CPU rendering.

-   Licensing complexity compared to open-source render engines.

-   Potential hardware, driver, and software mismatches across different
    software, affecting node performance

# \## Appendix (optional)

TBD
