# RNP-017: Integration of OctaneRender for Blender into the Render Network

| RNP # | Title | Category | Authors | Created | Status |
| ----- | --------------------- | -------- | ------------------ | ---------- |------- |
| 017 | Integration of OctaneRender for Blender into the Render Network | Core | Steven Scott, Dino Muhic | 2024-12-02 | Draft |

#  Overview

# 1. Overview

## 1.1 Proposal Summary

This proposal outlines the integration of OTOY\'s OctaneRender for
Blender into the Render Network, building upon the foundation
established by RNP-014 (Blender Cycles integration). This initiative
will provide Blender users with access to OctaneRender\'s powerful
GPU-accelerated rendering capabilities through the Render Network\'s
distributed infrastructure.

## 1.2 Background

OctaneRender is OTOY\'s industry-leading GPU rendering solution, known
for its physically accurate rendering and exceptional performance.

The integration will initially focus on supporting either the Blender
Octane Edition, a specialized build of Blender that comes pre-configured
with OctaneRender, or the OctaneBlender Addon, a more lightweight
plug-in approach, which works directly with the current Blender
Integration on the Render Network.

The goal is ensuring optimal stability and performance for artists.

# 2. Motivation

## 2.1 Expanding Creative Options

The integration of OctaneRender for Blender aligns with the Render
Network\'s commitment to providing artists with freedom of choice in
their creative tools:

-   While OctaneRender is OTOY\'s own product, the Render Network
    maintains its vendor-neutral position by treating all integrations
    with equal importance

-   This commitment to neutrality is demonstrated through equal support
    for various render engines (Cycles, OctaneRender, Redshift),
    ensuring artists can choose the best tool for their specific needs
    regardless of vendor

## 

## 2.2 Technical Excellence

OctaneRender brings additional capabilities to the Blender ecosystem:

-   Advanced GPU-accelerated rendering

-   Physically accurate materials and lighting

-   Real-time viewport performance

-   Established production pipeline integration

## 2.3 Strategic Alignment

This integration builds upon several strategic initiatives:

-   Follows the successful integration of Blender Cycles (RNP-014)

-   Leverages OTOY\'s expertise with both OctaneRender and the Render
    Network

-   Reinforces OTOY\'s commitment to the Blender ecosystem, following
    their backing of the Blender Development Fund

# 3. Stakeholders

### Artist Community

-   Primary beneficiaries of the integration

-   Will participate in beta testing and feature prioritization

-   Includes both existing OctaneRender users and potential new adopters

### Render Network Developer Team

-   Responsible for technical integration

-   Will maintain both Cycles and OctaneRender support

-   Focus on optimizing performance and stability

### OTOY OctaneRender Team

-   Provides technical expertise on OctaneRender integration

-   Ensures alignment with OctaneRender development roadmap

-   Coordinates version compatibility

### Render Network Client Success Team

-   Creates documentation for the new integration

-   Provides support for artists transitioning to OctaneRender

-   Develops educational resources

# 4. Implementation

## 4.1 Timeline

The implementation of the Blender Octane integration is planned for the
first half of 2025.

## 4.2 Technical Approach

The implementation will evaluate the support of both the Blender Octane
Edition and the OctaneBlender Addon approaches:

### 4.2.1 Integration Options

**A**. **Blender Octane Edition**

-   Pre-configured Blender build with integrated OctaneRender

-   Known for stability in production environments

-   Simplified deployment and version management

**B**. **OctaneBlender Addon**

-   Plugin-based integration with standard Blender

-   Flexible deployment options

-   Potential for simplified version management

### 4.2.2 Implementation Strategy

-   Evaluate both approaches during development phase

-   Test performance and stability metrics

-   Make final implementation decision based on:

    -   Technical feasibility

    -   Performance benchmarks

    -   Artist feedback

    -   Maintenance considerations

## 4.3. Development Process

### 4.3.1 Development and Release Process

The integration will follow a structured process to ensure a smooth
rollout and high-quality user

experience. The key stages are:

1\. **Local Development and Testing**: The Render Network developer team
will work on integrating Octane for Blender on their local development
machines, conducting thorough testing and debugging to ensure
compatibility and stability.

2\. **Developer Machines on Staging**: After the local development and
testing phase, the integration will be deployed to the staging
environment using the developers' machines. This allows the team to test
the integration in an environment that closely mimics the production
setup, but with the familiarity of their own development machines.

3\. **Dedicated Staging Machines**: Once the integration has been
thoroughly tested on the developers\' machines in the staging
environment, it will be deployed to dedicated staging machines. This
step ensures that the integration functions as expected on machines
specifically configured for the staging environment, further validating
its readiness for production.

4\. **Closed Beta Release**: After extensive internal testing, the
integration will be rolled out to a select group of closed beta testers.
These will be artists from the Blender community who have experience
with OctaneRender and are willing to provide valuable feedback on the
integration. The closed beta phase will help identify and address any
remaining issues before a wider public release.

5\. **Documentation Preparation**: During the closed beta phase, the
Render Network\'s Client Success team will work closely with the beta
testers to gather insights and create comprehensive documentation. This
documentation will cover topics such as scene optimization, scene
preparation, network usage, and troubleshooting, ensuring that users
have the necessary resources to make the most of the Octane Blender
integration.

6\. **Public Beta Release**: Based on the feedback and improvements from
the closed beta phase, the Octane Blender integration will be made
available as a public beta. This phase will allow a broader audience of
Blender users to test the integration and provide feedback, helping to
identify any remaining issues or areas for improvement.

7\. **Monitoring and Refinement**: Throughout the public beta phase, the
Render Network team will closely monitor error rates, support cases, and
user feedback. This information will be used to refine the integration
further, addressing any outstanding issues or implementing requested
features.

8\. **Stable Release**: Once the public beta phase has been successful
and all major issues have been addressed, the Octane Blender integration
will be rolled out as a stable release. This final version will be made
available to all Render Network users, providing them with access to the
powerful rendering capabilities of the Render Network for their Octane
Blender projects.

By following such a structured approach, the Render Network team aims to
ensure a seamless integration of Blender Cycles and to leverage feedback
and insights from the Blender community.

# 5. Technical Considerations

Building upon the foundation established in RNP-014\'s Blender
integration, the team will leverage existing solutions while addressing
OctaneRender-specific requirements:

1\. **Encryption Solution**: The encryption solution implemented for
Blender is now in place and only will need minor adjustments to support
the new render engine.

2\. **User Interface**: The web application UI for Octane Render jobs
already exists and can be used for Octane Blender as well.

4\. **Outputs and Formats**: OctaneRender output formats are now well
established on the Render Network and will only require minor
adjustments.

5\. **Version Handling**: The existing multi-render version handling
mechanisms will be expanded to support multiple versions of both Blender
builds and OctaneRender.

6\. **API Extensions**: The Render Network API supports
OctaneRender-specific functionality as well as Blender-specific scene
settings and will be further refined.

## 5.1 Artist Workflow

The workflow for artists using Blender with OctaneRender will follow the
identical established patterns from the Cycles integration:

1\. **Mandatory scene preparation steps**: Before submitting a scene for
rendering, any third-party plugins used in the project will need to be
baked into explicit scene data and assets.

2\. **Scene Data and Asset Packaging**: Scenes will be saved as .blend
files, including all scene data and assets, for rendering on the Render
Network.

3\. **File Upload**: Users will have the option to upload either
individual .blend files or compressed .zip archives containing the
.blend files for rendering on the Render Network.

4\. **Render Tiers and Pricing**: For GPU rendering, the same render
tiers and pricing model as existing integrations will be used.

## 5.2 Render Nodes

To ensure optimal performance with OctaneRender workloads, render nodes
will require additional preparation:

1\. **GPU Scaling**: The job assigner will use the existing settings for
OctaneRender, eventually with some fine tuning (RAM requirements, etc.)
for Octane Blender.

2\. **Node Requirements**: The requirements will be identical for all
OctaneRender jobs, eventually with some additional requirements for
Octane Blender (see above).

# 6. Drawbacks

-   Further increase in DCC and render engine versions to maintain

-   Additional complexity in managing two potential integration
    approaches (Octane Edition vs addon)

-   Need for additional Octane Blender support expertise

# 7. Future Considerations

1\. **Render Network Wizard Integration:**

-   Extending the planned Blender wizard (referenced in RNP-014) to
    support OctaneRender

-   Additional scene preparation and validation tools

2\. **Pipeline Integration:**

-   Enhanced integration with virtual production workflows

-   Support for advanced OctaneRender features in future releases

-   Continued alignment with Blender\'s development roadmap
