# RNP-018: Year 2 of BME Emissions Allocations

| RNP # | Title | Category | Authors | Created | Status |
| ----- | --------------------- | -------- | ------------------ | ---------- |------- |
| 018 | Year 2 of BME Emissions Allocations | Process | Render Foundation | 2024-12-02 | Draft |

#  Overview

# Category

Process

# Overview

The purpose of the Render Network Foundation is "maintaining the core
Render Network protocol and growing its community." In RNP-001, the
Render Network community voted to enact the Burn Mint Equilibrium (BME),
a network economic mechanism. In the proposal, annual allocations are
required. This is the Year 2 of BME Emissions Allocations.

Reasoning

As we reach the end of our first year running BME --- passed in RNP-001
and revised in RNP-006 --- it makes sense to first review and reflect on
accomplishments of the Render Network and Render Foundation. Following
the ratification of BME, the Render community:

-   Implemented 14 RNPs, with 8 passed in 2024

-   Funded 93 Artist Grants

-   Paid out 1.14M of RENDER upgrade rewards

-   Upgraded 355M RENDER tokens from Ethereum to Solana

-   Brought several Compute Clients to the Render Network

-   Nearly tripled 2023 on-chain network usage

Of the total Year 1 emissions, (as of Dec 20, 2024) the network will
have distributed:

-   1.14M in Community Upgrade Rewards

-   1.55M in Node Operator Payments and Availability Rewards

-   0.7M in Artist and AI Compute Client rewards

## Year 2 Budget

Emissions during Year 2 are 5.9M RENDER, as confirmed by RNP-001. After
hours of interviews with every aspect of stakeholders in the the project
it is proposed that the following allocations for Year 2 are enacted:

-   Continue Node Rewards at the current weekly levels of 20.7K RENDER
    per week (average of \~90K RENDER per month), and reserving a total
    of 1.5M RENDER (25% of Year 2 emissions) for the growth and product
    release initiatives

-   Increase Artist and AI client rewards from 0.54M in 2024 to 1.50M in
    2025, representing 25% of year 2 emissions

-   2.9M RENDER (50% of Year 2 budget) for community
    initiatives, R&D, operations, and future growth initiatives

# Stakeholders Impacted

This is for all members of the Render community.

# Implementation Plan

Upon the passing of this RNP, Year 2 emissions will be enacted for the
second calendar year of the Burn Mint Equilibrium.

Under the process we already established earlier this year, we expect to
continually review these applications over time and as things change to
ensure emissions are optimized for community needs.

# Technical Considerations

None.

# Potential Drawbacks

As with any forward-looking budget, we might misallocate based on what
we think the needs of the community are. As per RNP-013, we shall
monitor this going forward, and should volumes change materially or new
opportunities emerge, changes will continue at least on a quarterly
basis going forward via the RNP process.

We are super thrilled with the strong community and are looking forward
to Year 2. Budgeting for Year 3 will take place next year around the
same time, with discussions ongoing throughout the year.
